Team Players

The Roberto Clemente Award honors baseball stars for their work on and off the field

In October, baseball fans cheer for America s top teams battling to win the World Series. But its not just the winning team that gets a prize. Major League Baseball presents many other honors at the games. One is the Roberto Clemente Award, named after the first Hispanic player elected to the National Baseball Hall of Fame. The trophy is given each year to a player with outstanding sportsmanship, skill, and community service.
Super Sluggers

Each of the 30 teams nominates one player for the award every year. Fans vote online for their top choice. The winner of the fan vote gets one vote. Judges, including Vera Clemente, who married the baseball legend in 1964, then vote, too. “I help Mom understand how long the players have been in the major leagues but I leave her alone when it comes to voting,” Clementes son Roberto Jr. told TFK. “Her heart tells her and she s been on point every single year.”

This years nominees include Chicago White Sox infielder Paul Konerko, Jimmy Rollins, who plays shortstop for the Philadelphia Phillies, and pitcher Felix Hernandez of the Seattle Mariners. Konerko, who played his final game on September 28 after 18 years in the major leagues, helped create the Bring Me Home campaign. The program helps children in foster care. In foster care, children are placed in safe, temporary homes during a time when their parents are unable to care for them. Rollins started J-Rolls Aces and J-Rolls Readers. Both programs help students who live in poor areas of Philadelphia. Hernandez teamed up this year with Seattle rapper Macklemore to start the #ChangetheGame anti-bullying campaign. The program asks kids to sign a pledge that encourages them to be kind.

A Home-Run Hero

Roberto Clemente was born in Carolina, Puerto Rico, in 1934. He played as an outfielder for the Pittsburgh Pirates from 1955 to 1972. He was the National League batting champ four times. His 3,000 hits included 240 home runs. On December 31, 1972, Clemente died in a plane crash. He was on his way to Nicaragua, to deliver supplies to earthquake victims.

Roberto Jr. has many memories of his father. “If kids were playing in a playground, he would stop his car and start playing ball with them,” he recalls. “He was privileged to play a game that he loved but he used that as a vehicle to help other people.” Roberto Jr. and his family are honored that Major League Baseball gives an award in his fathers name to an outstanding player. Says Roberto Jr., “The legacy is stronger today than it was 40 years ago.” This year s winner will be announced before one of the World Series games.

http://www.timeforkids.com