3 New French Toast Recipes to Try This Weekend

When the weekend rolls around, there’s nothing better than sleeping in, lazing, and having breakfast in your PJs. And while French toast has always been a mainstay of our brunch orders, we never really got the hang of cooking it at home — until now. Thanks to these amazing recipes, we’ll be making French toast every weekend from now ‘til the end of the time. The best part? There’s an option for everyone.

Related: Junk Food Has Never Looked THIS Elegant

Have a sweet tooth? Try our tiramisu French toast for the ultimate morning dessert. Are you gluten intolerant (or, just avoiding gluten because you’re convinced it’s the devil)? We’ve got you covered with a gluten-free version that is crusted in GF granola and swathed in thick, creamy Greek yogurt. Oh, you’re a vegan? No problem! You can use canned pineapple, coconut milk, and ginger to create a tropical French toast that is totally luscious. 

Related: Muesli Monday: 5 Fast Recipes For A Better Breakfast

Find recipes for all three ahead, and get ready to rediscover the quintessential breakfast dish in a big way.

Traditional: Tiramisu-inspired French Toast
Yields 6 large servings or 12 small servings

Ingredients
For the bread and soaking liquid:
12 slices sweet-style bread, such as challah or Portuguese bread (sliced ¼ to ½-inch thick)
3 large eggs
½ cup heavy cream
½ cup mascarpone cheese (or substitute sour cream)
½ cup confectioners sugar
2 shots espresso, cold (or 2 tbsp espresso powder, whisked into the soaking liquid until completely melted)
¼ cup dark rum (or vanilla extract)
¼ tsp salt
Unsalted butter (for frying)

For the filling:
1 ½ cups mascarpone cheese (or cream cheese at room temperature)
¼ cup confectioners sugar
2 tsp espresso powder
Pinch of salt

To finish:
2 tbsp unsweetened cocoa powder
2 tbsp confectioners sugar 

Instructions
1. Preheat oven to 300?F. Line a sheet pan with parchment paper or aluminum foil. Set aside.

2. In a large, shallow dish, whisk together eggs, heavy cream, mascarpone cheese, confectioners sugar, espresso, dark rum, and salt. Place as many slices of bread as you can in an even layer into the egg mixture and soak on one side for 5 minutes. Flip and soak for 5 more minutes.

3. In a large, non-stick pan, melt 1 tablespoon unsalted butter. Carefully remove the bread slices from the soaking liquid and allow any excess liquid to drip back into the shallow dish. Fry each slice on medium-high heat for 2 to 3 minutes on each side, or until the bread is golden brown on both sides.  

4. Transfer the fried French toast to the parchment or aluminum foil-lined sheet pan and store in the preheated oven to keep warm.

5. Continue soaking and frying off the remaining slices.

https://www.yahoo.com/food/if-you-like-french-toast-these-recipes-are-a-must-117032636176.html