March Madness: Lets Recap

Who were the big winners of the 2015 NCAA basketball tournament?
Even if you didn’t fill out a March Madness bracket this year, you have probably heard the buzz about NCAA’s basketball tournament. Each year, fans take an emotional rollercoaster ride of highs and lows as they watch their favorite college teams compete for the coveted championship title. This year was no different as the tournament came to an exciting close on April 6th and 7th. On Monday night in Indianapolis, Indiana, Duke University’s men’s team beat the University of Wisconsin’s team with a score of 68-53.On Tuesday night, in Tampa, Florida, the University of Connecticut’s (UConn) women’s team beat the University of Notre Dame 63-53.

For UConn’s head coach Geno Auriemma, this year’s win marked his 10th NCAA Tournament title in the past 20 years. He is now tied for the most titles in college basketball with University of California, Los Angeles head coach John Wooden. “What we have done here in the last 20 years is pretty remarkable in its own right,” Auriemma said after the win.

For Duke head coach Mike Krzyzewski, who has lead the team for 35 years, it was the fifth championship in nine trips his team has made to the title game. "It was heaven," Krzyzewski said of the stadium where he is now 4-0 in Final Fours.

Freshman Fever

The Duke Blue Devils beat the Wisconsin Badgers 68-53 and took home their fifth national championship in school history. Wisconsin had a nine-point lead with 13:23 remaining, but freshman guard Grayson Allen led Duke back. He hit a three-pointer then grabbed a three-point play on Duke’s next two possessions to cut Wisconsin’s lead to three.

Wisconsin took a 58-56 lead with 4:25 to go, but the Blue Devils responded with a 10-0 run. Badgers Frank Kaminsky, nicknamed “Big Frank” for his 6’11 frame, was the national player of the year going into the game. The power forward scored 21 points and 11 rebounds while his All-America match-up, Duke’s Jahlil Okafor, was limited to 10 points and three rebounds.

Senior Tyus Jones finished with 23 points and was named the Most Outstanding Player of the Final Four, while Allen had a break-through performance with 16 points. “It was fun to watch my teammates do what they do,” Okafor said. “They have my back the entire season, and it was no different tonight.”

Hungry for More

Coach Geno Auriemma and his team of “Hungry Huskies” outplayed Notre Dame to clinch UConns third straight title. Junior Breanna Stewart added 15 rebounds and eight points for her unstoppable team. The two-time AP Player of the Year has saved her best games for when the lights shined their brightest. She became the first woman to achieve the honor of being named most outstanding player of the Final Four three times in a row. Kareem Abdul-Jabbar is the only men s player to have done it.

There just hasnt been a player like Stewie in the women s game in a long, long time," Auriemma said. "She’s the kind of player that women s basketball probably hasnt seen."

Stewart stated when she came to UConn that her goal was to win four championships. She is now one title away from reaching that goal. She broke down on the podium with tears streaming down her face. 

"I think its really surreal and I havent had a chance to even think about that," said Stewart wearing the championship net around her neck. "I have won three national championships, but said I wanted to win four, you cant win four without winning three first."

http://www.timeforkids.com