Beauty is the beast in British author Hermione Eyre's ambitious, deliciously clever debut novel Viper Wine (Hogarth). Set in a seventeenth-century London steeped in magic, vanity, decadence, devotion, trippy time travel, and a diabolical beauty potion worthy of Shakespeare, the book's extravagant intelligence and heart were inspired by a true love story for the ages, between courtly Renaissance man Sir Kenelm Digby and his celebrated, incomparably beautiful, willful wife, Venetia Stanley. Oxford-educated journalist Eyre lives in twenty-first-century London.

How did you come to be enchanted by and seemingly an expert on the English high life of the 1630s?
All that history! All that alchemy! The 1630s never felt very distant to me. My mother was an actress, and I was taken to see a lot of Shakespeare plays before I was old enough to understand them. The language gets into your blood that way.

What drew you to the real-life Venetia Stanley (Lady Digby) and her husband, the alchemist and adventurer Sir Kenelm Digby? They are obscure to us but come vibrantly to life in your erudite postmodern novel.
Thank you! Paintings drew me in. There is a mesmerizing painting of Venetia on her deathbed at the age of 32. When her body was discovered, her husband sent for the greatest artist of that time, Anthony van Dyck, to come to her bedside. These days, you'd just get a paramedic. I knew I wanted to write this story when I discovered she'd possibly died from drinking viper wine.


WE RECOMMEND
There Is an Instagram Account of Hot Dudes Reading
Your work as a journalist has included interviews with many A-list actors. What aspect of fame—and its fading, like beauty—informed the writing of Viper Wine? In New York City—and probably in London—depending on the neighborhood, you are strolling past a virtual army of the sewn and tucked.
Ha! Why do they do it? In my story, Venetia uses viper wine and starts to look younger, fresher—but less like herself. You might say her quiddity is lost. It's something we see in faces all around us lately. It's a perplexing modern experience that I transposed into a different historical period. In the seventeenth century, women were painting with lead, flaying faces, and stuffing their cheeks to conceal the effect of missing teeth.

One of my favorite interviewees, the brilliant actor Carey Mulligan, told me that she had already been advised to have Botox at the age of 25. Characterizing Venetia, I had in mind a theory that applies to many celebrities today—not Carey Mulligan, but a fair few others I've met: Their development stops at the age that fame hits.

How did you decide upon the time-travel aspect of the novel?
When women are getting younger every day, time becomes fluid. I had a lot of fun creating a perfectly accurate rendering of the 1630s and then inserting an anachronism, such as David Bowie or a wagon wheel. They're like little objets perdus, drifting through time. I enjoyed the naughtiness of it. That's not what historical novelists are meant to do.

Who are your literary influences? What did you take from them that's served you as a writer, a fabulist?
I love the hallucinogenic quality of Borges, and the Dickensian sense of a whole world inside a novel, and whipcrack, stylish writers like Dorothy Parker. I wish I were even a fraction as good at plotting as Daphne du Maurier. Actually, Viper Wine has been compared more to films than novels—Sofia Coppola's Marie Antoinette and Stanley Kubrick's Barry Lyndon are touchstones.

Can you tell me something about yourself that I never would have guessed
I spent a year working as a croupier dealing roulette and blackjack in a London casino.

This article originally appeared in the May 2015 issue of ELLE.