1. You don't have to stay in your bedroom until noon in order to avoid inane small talk with some random one-night stand your roommate brought home.

Knowing that [Guest-Star Penis] is way more into "old Radiohead" than "the new stuff" is a waste of valuable brain space.

2. If he is still having breakfast with her, there's no need to creep around them to the bathroom while tugging your sleep T-shirt over your butt.

While wishing the whole time that you could jump on your toothbrush and fly away, like an awkward dental witch.

3. And, on the flip side, you don't have to feel weird about the roommate etiquette of bringing a guy home.

4. The ability to have eardrum-shattering sex without feeling rude.

At least until your neighbor bangs on your ceiling.

GIF

WE RECOMMEND
24 Things a Woman Thinks During the Morning Chaos
5. No fighting about whose turn it is to clean the bathroom or buy the paper towels, unless you happen to be Sybil.

6. Since it's your own space (and probably more pricey than a share would be), you feel motivated to ensure it's clean and cute.

Whereas even one messy roommate can drag a whole place down.

7. You control how hot and cold your place is.

No passive-aggressive air conditioning adjustments!

8. Nobody's there to judge you for singing a 2007 Jason Mraz hit into an empty wine bottle.

Not that I've done that. Last week.

GIF
9. Or doing a workout DVD in your underwear in the living room.

In front of a mirror in order to ensure proper form/admire your ab definition, of course.

10. Nobody can distract you from your book with their Law & Order marathon.

You can finally finish The Girl on the Train.

11. And yet, binge-watching Law & Order: SVU suddenly has educational value.

You're a woman living alone—gotta brush up on some lessons from Detective Olivia Benson.

12. You, and you alone, get to choose when to see other human beings socially.

Invaluable when you're still relatively new in the work world and sometimes after a long day you just. can't. deal.

GIF
13. Your food, clothes, and makeup are yours.

No weirdly sneaky avocado thieves, or someone who guilts you into lending her your prized Isabel Marant for Target skirt even though you know she'll stain it.

14. You can get a fresh pizza delivered and stash it in the freezer for a week's worth of meals.

Otherwise known as the living-alone-in-2015 equivalent of shooting a bison.

15. No need to launch into a defensive spiel every time you have company over and they notice tacky or clich?d furniture/books/movies/d?cor from roommates.

Or arrange for the epigraph on your headstone to read "The Breakfast at Tiffany's Poster Was Jenna's."

16. You have a ready-made set of excuses to skip out of work for a few hours besides "doctor's appointments."

Like having to be home for the Time Warner guy, or the super...I mean, who else could deal with the Netflix queue exterminator at 4 P.M. on a Wednesday but you?

17. The rent may be ludicrously high, but at the end of the day, cutting that check makes you feel like a boss bitch.

Every damn time.